README.md, before:

# dpbe_l2_pre_registration


## Study Information

### Title (required)

How bilinguals perceive speech depends on which language they think they're hearing: A replication study




### Description (optional)

Research has been done to determine if bilinguals, in Spanish and English, are able to shift their voicing perception across aural controlled language contexts that are cued conceptually and perceptually (Gonzales & Lotto, 2013). An extension of that study was conducted by Gonzalez et al. (2017) where the researchers cued the language context only conceptually, while using both Spanish-English bilinguals and French-English bilinguals and demonstrated that with only conceptual knowledge, bilinguals were still able to adjust their voicing perception. Casillas & Simonet (2018) conducted a study replicating the Gonzales and Lotto (2013) study specifically through its methodology, where the cue for the language mode was conducted perceptually through an auditory stimuli. In that study, the researchers analyzed the double phonemic boundary effect in early and late bilinguals using a stimulus induced language mode that showed that early bilinguals, but not the lower proficient learners had effect of a double phonemic boundary. For the present study we will be analyzing the double phonemic boundary effect using Spanish-English early and late bilinguals with a context conceptually induced language mode. 


### Hypotheses (required)


-  Bilingual listeners perceptually adjust to changes in pronunciation across languages based on their conceptual understanding of which language they are currently hearing (non-directional)

- There are two phonemic systems in bilinguals' minds (non-directional)





## Design Plan

### Study type (required)

- Experiment - A researcher randomly assigns treatments to study subjects, this includes field or lab experiments. This is also known as an intervention experiment and includes randomized controlled trials.





### Blinding (required)


-The experiment is a single blind study. None of the participants know which group they 
belong to. All participants, however, will be exposed to all stimuli. 
-Researchers will randomly assign participants to groups. 




### Is there any additional blinding in this study? (optional)

No



### Study design (required)

**Describe your study design. Examples include two-group, factorial, randomized block, and repeated measures. Is it a between (unpaired), within-subject (paired), or mixed design? Describe any counterbalancing required. Typical study designs for observation studies include cohort, cross sectional, and case-control studies.**

The present study will be a within-subject study. 


### Randomization (optional)

The participants will be randomly assigned to groups. There will be randomization in the order that they complete the tasks. 






## Sampling Plan

### Existing Data (required)


- Registration prior to creation of data 




### Explanation of existing data (optional)

**If you indicate that you will be using some data that already exist in this study, please describe the steps you have taken to assure that you are unaware of any patterns or summary statistics in the data. This may include an explanation of how access to the data has been limited, who has observed the data, or how you have avoided observing any analysis of the specific data you will use in your study.**




### Data collection procedures (required)


One hundred and twenty participants will be recruited for this study. While bilingual participants will be undergraduate and graduate students at Rutgers University, monolingual participants will be college students at a Latin American or Spanish university. Participants will be divided in four groups: thirty simultaneous Spanish-English bilinguals, thirty intermediate English second language learners of Spanish, thirty advanced English second language learners of Spanish, and thirty Spanish monolingual participants. The first three groups os participants will receive either extra credit or monetary compensation for their voluntary participation in this study. 
The data collection period will last for roughly three weeks, beginning March 25th, 2019.



### Sample size (required)

**Describe the sample size of your study. How many units will be analyzed in the study? This could be the number of people, birds, classrooms, plots, interactions, or countries included. If the units are not individuals, then describe the size requirements for each unit. If you are using a clustered or multilevel design, how many units are you collecting at each level of the analysis?**

-The sample pool of participants will be around 120 second language learners at Rutgers University. All participants will have learned Spanish as a second language after the age of 13. 


### Sample size rationale (optional)

**This could include a power analysis or an arbitrary constraint such as time, money, or personnel.**



### Stopping rule (optional)

**If your data collection procedures do not give you full control over your exact sample size, specify how you will decide when to terminate your data collection.**








## Variables

### Manipulated variables (optional)

**Describe all variables you plan to manipulate and the levels or treatment arms of each variable. This is not applicable to any observational study.**

- resynthesized acoustic continua of bafri-pafri, where we will manipulate the VOTs of the /b/ and /p/ sounds.



### Measured variables (required)

**Describe each variable that you will measure. This will include outcome measures, as well as any predictors or covariates that you will measure. You do not need to include any variables that you plan on collecting if they are not going to be included in the confirmatory analyses of this study.**


- "Bafri"/"Pafri" responses in a two-alternative forced-choice labeling task, according to the resynthesized continua.


### Indices (optional)

**If any measurements are going to be combined into an index (or even a mean), what measures will you use and how will they be combined? Include either a formula or a precise description of your method. If you are using a more complicated statistical method to combine measures (e.g. a factor analysis), you can note that here but describe the exact method in the analysis plan section.**





## Analysis Plan

### Statistical models (required)

**What statistical model will you use to test each hypothesis? Please include the type of model (e.g. ANOVA, multiple regression, SEM, etc) and the specification of the model (this includes each variable that will be included as predictors, outcomes, or covariates). Please specify any interactions, subgroup analyses, pairwise or complex contrasts, or follow-up tests from omnibus tests. If you plan on using any positive controls, negative controls, or manipulation checks you may mention that here. Remember that any test not included here must be noted as an exploratory test in your final article.**
Each participant's identification reponses will be fitted to a binary logisitic regression model. This model will be used to predict the probability of participant response along the VOT continuum. 



### Transformations (optional)

**If you plan on transforming, centering, recoding the data, or will require a coding scheme for categorical variables, please describe that process.**




### Inference criteria (optional)

**What criteria will you use to make inferences? Please describe the information you’ll use (e.g. specify the p-values, Bayes factors, specific model fit indices), as well as cut-off criterion, where appropriate. Will you be using one or two tailed tests for each of your analyses? If you are comparing multiple conditions or testing multiple hypotheses, will you account for this?**




### Data exclusion (optional)

**How will you determine which data points or samples if any to exclude from your analyses? How will outliers be handled? Will you use any awareness check?**




### Missing data (optional)

**How will you deal with incomplete or missing data?**




### Exploratory analysis (optional)

**If you plan to explore your data set to look for unexpected differences or relationships, you may describe those tests here. An exploratory test is any test where a prediction is not made up front, or there are multiple possible tests that you are going to use. A statistically significant finding in an exploratory test is a great way to form a new confirmatory hypothesis, which could be registered at a later time.**






## Other

### Other

**If there is any additional information that you feel needs to be included in your preregistration, please enter it here. Literature cited, disclosures of any related work such as replications or work that uses the same data, or other context that will be helpful for future readers would be appropriate here.**

**Literature cited**

Casillas, J. V. and M. Simonet (2018). “Perceptual categorization and bilingual language modes: Assessing the double phonemic boundary in early and late bilinguals”. In: Journal of Phonetics 71, pp. 51–64.

Gonzales, K. and A. J. Lotto (2013). “A bafri, un pafri: Bilinguals’ pseudoword identifications support language-specific phonetic systems”. In: Psychological science 24.11, pp. 2135–2142.

Gonzales, K, K. Byers-Heinlein and A. Lotto (2019). “How bilinguals perceive speech depends on which language they think they’re hearing”. In: Cognition 182, pp. 318–330.

Commit message:

Research questions Added a manipulated variable Statistical models - can be improved

README.md, after:

# dpbe_l2_pre_registration


## Study Information

### Title (required)

How bilinguals perceive speech depends on which language they think they're hearing: A replication study




### Description (optional)

Research has been done to determine if bilinguals, in Spanish and English, are able to shift their voicing perception across aural controlled language contexts that are cued conceptually and perceptually (Gonzales & Lotto, 2013). An extension of that study was conducted by Gonzalez et al. (2017) where the researchers cued the language context only conceptually, while using both Spanish-English bilinguals and French-English bilinguals and demonstrated that with only conceptual knowledge, bilinguals were still able to adjust their voicing perception. Casillas & Simonet (2018) conducted a study replicating the Gonzales and Lotto (2013) study specifically through its methodology, where the cue for the language mode was conducted perceptually through an auditory stimuli. In that study, the researchers analyzed the double phonemic boundary effect in early and late bilinguals using a stimulus induced language mode that showed that early bilinguals, but not the lower proficient learners had effect of a double phonemic boundary. For the present study we will be analyzing the double phonemic boundary effect using Spanish-English early and late bilinguals with a context conceptually induced language mode. 


### Research questions (shouldn't we include them as well???)

Evidence suggests that late second-language learners of Spanish are able to display language-specific perceptual boundaries (Casillas & Simonet 2018) and that early Spanish-English bilinguals adjust their identification boundary based on conceptual knowledge of the language context (Gonzales et al 2019).  

This study aims to address the following main research question: Are late second-language learners of different proficiency levels able to adjust their speech perception using only conceptual cues in the same way as early bilinguals?


### Hypotheses (required)

We hypothesize that the present study will replicate earlier findings demonstrating that:  

-  Bilingual listeners perceptually adjust to changes in pronunciation across languages based on their conceptual understanding of which language they are currently hearing (non-directional)  

If this hypothesis is supported by our data, more evidence will be provided to state that:  

- There are two phonemic systems in bilinguals' minds (non-directional)





## Design Plan

### Study type (required)

- Experiment - A researcher randomly assigns treatments to study subjects, this includes field or lab experiments. This is also known as an intervention experiment and includes randomized controlled trials.





### Blinding (required)


-The experiment is a single blind study. None of the participants know which group they 
belong to. All participants, however, will be exposed to all stimuli. 
-Researchers will randomly assign participants to groups. 




### Is there any additional blinding in this study? (optional)

No



### Study design (required)

**Describe your study design. Examples include two-group, factorial, randomized block, and repeated measures. Is it a between (unpaired), within-subject (paired), or mixed design? Describe any counterbalancing required. Typical study designs for observation studies include cohort, cross sectional, and case-control studies.**

The present study will be a within-subject study. 


### Randomization (optional)

The participants will be randomly assigned to groups. There will be randomization in the order that they complete the tasks. 






## Sampling Plan

### Existing Data (required)


- Registration prior to creation of data 




### Explanation of existing data (optional)

**If you indicate that you will be using some data that already exist in this study, please describe the steps you have taken to assure that you are unaware of any patterns or summary statistics in the data. This may include an explanation of how access to the data has been limited, who has observed the data, or how you have avoided observing any analysis of the specific data you will use in your study.**




### Data collection procedures (required)


One hundred and twenty participants will be recruited for this study. While bilingual participants will be undergraduate and graduate students at Rutgers University, monolingual participants will be college students at a Latin American or Spanish university. Participants will be divided in four groups: thirty simultaneous Spanish-English bilinguals, thirty intermediate English second language learners of Spanish, thirty advanced English second language learners of Spanish, and thirty Spanish monolingual participants. The first three groups of participants will receive either extra credit or monetary compensation for their voluntary participation in this study. 
The data collection period will last for roughly three weeks, beginning March 25th, 2019.



### Sample size (required)

**Describe the sample size of your study. How many units will be analyzed in the study? This could be the number of people, birds, classrooms, plots, interactions, or countries included. If the units are not individuals, then describe the size requirements for each unit. If you are using a clustered or multilevel design, how many units are you collecting at each level of the analysis?**

-The sample pool of participants will be around 120 second language learners at Rutgers University. All participants will have learned Spanish as a second language after the age of 13. 


### Sample size rationale (optional)

**This could include a power analysis or an arbitrary constraint such as time, money, or personnel.**



### Stopping rule (optional)

**If your data collection procedures do not give you full control over your exact sample size, specify how you will decide when to terminate your data collection.**








## Variables

### Manipulated variables (optional)

**Describe all variables you plan to manipulate and the levels or treatment arms of each variable. This is not applicable to any observational study.**

- resynthesized acoustic continua of bafri-pafri, where we will manipulate the VOTs of the /b/ and /p/ sounds.  

- language context (English or Spanish)


### Measured variables (required)

**Describe each variable that you will measure. This will include outcome measures, as well as any predictors or covariates that you will measure. You do not need to include any variables that you plan on collecting if they are not going to be included in the confirmatory analyses of this study.**


- "Bafri"/"Pafri" responses in a two-alternative forced-choice labeling task, according to the resynthesized continua.


### Indices (optional)

**If any measurements are going to be combined into an index (or even a mean), what measures will you use and how will they be combined? Include either a formula or a precise description of your method. If you are using a more complicated statistical method to combine measures (e.g. a factor analysis), you can note that here but describe the exact method in the analysis plan section.**





## Analysis Plan

### Statistical models (required)

**What statistical model will you use to test each hypothesis? Please include the type of model (e.g. ANOVA, multiple regression, SEM, etc) and the specification of the model (this includes each variable that will be included as predictors, outcomes, or covariates). Please specify any interactions, subgroup analyses, pairwise or complex contrasts, or follow-up tests from omnibus tests. If you plan on using any positive controls, negative controls, or manipulation checks you may mention that here. Remember that any test not included here must be noted as an exploratory test in your final article.**  

Each participant's identification reponses will be fitted to a binary logisitic regression model (see Gonzales et al 2019). This model will be used to predict the probability of participant response along the VOT continuum.  

We will analyze perceptual responses of L2 learners separately, depending on their proficiency level (beginners, intermediates and advanced) to see whether all of these groups display a main effect of language context or not.  


### Transformations (optional)

**If you plan on transforming, centering, recoding the data, or will require a coding scheme for categorical variables, please describe that process.**




### Inference criteria (optional)

**What criteria will you use to make inferences? Please describe the information you’ll use (e.g. specify the p-values, Bayes factors, specific model fit indices), as well as cut-off criterion, where appropriate. Will you be using one or two tailed tests for each of your analyses? If you are comparing multiple conditions or testing multiple hypotheses, will you account for this?**




### Data exclusion (optional)

**How will you determine which data points or samples if any to exclude from your analyses? How will outliers be handled? Will you use any awareness check?**




### Missing data (optional)

**How will you deal with incomplete or missing data?**




### Exploratory analysis (optional)

**If you plan to explore your data set to look for unexpected differences or relationships, you may describe those tests here. An exploratory test is any test where a prediction is not made up front, or there are multiple possible tests that you are going to use. A statistically significant finding in an exploratory test is a great way to form a new confirmatory hypothesis, which could be registered at a later time.**






## Other

### Other

**If there is any additional information that you feel needs to be included in your preregistration, please enter it here. Literature cited, disclosures of any related work such as replications or work that uses the same data, or other context that will be helpful for future readers would be appropriate here.**

**Literature cited**

Casillas, J. V. and M. Simonet (2018). “Perceptual categorization and bilingual language modes: Assessing the double phonemic boundary in early and late bilinguals”. In: Journal of Phonetics 71, pp. 51–64.

Gonzales, K. and A. J. Lotto (2013). “A bafri, un pafri: Bilinguals’ pseudoword identifications support language-specific phonetic systems”. In: Psychological science 24.11, pp. 2135–2142.

Gonzales, K, K. Byers-Heinlein and A. Lotto (2019). “How bilinguals perceive speech depends on which language they think they’re hearing”. In: Cognition 182, pp. 318–330.
